# MAE 4060

## Introduction

This set of modules is a collection of ideas related to Cornell University's MAE 4060: Introduction to Spaceflight Mechanics. While it is not likely rigorous enough to fully replace any individual class session, it should be able to provide a visual and intuitive supplement to the work done in class. Understanding that MAE 4060 and 4160, combined, deal with both the physics of orbits and the engineering of spacecraft, the following details several modules to implement throughout the course, with a gently suggested throughline to explore "progression" through these modules.

## Module 1: trajectories in space

Two approaches to thinking about trajectories are to either 1) expand one's knowledge of ground-based projectile motion in the presence of gravity, or 2) start infinitely far from a gravitational body and observe what happens when objects are released from rest. This module will explore both concepts.

### Module 1a: going up into space

Students should become familiar with the idea that many concepts in orbital mechanics are independent of mass. The following are a sample set of questions that students may be expected to answer, whether as an in-class worksheet or for homework. 

---

Neglect the effects of air resistance in all questions unless otherwise specified.

1. A golf ball (mass: 45.9g) falls 25 m off a bridge from rest. What is the velocity of the golf ball right before it hits the ground?
2. A brick (mass: 2.27 kg) falls from the same bridge. What is the velocity of the brick right before it hits the ground?
3. A bus (mass: 12,000 kg) falls from the same bridge. What is the velocity of the brick right before it hits the ground?

What are the effects of mass on velocity? What are the effects of velocity on trajectory?

How much energy does each object have?

The same three objects are now horizontally pushed from the same bridge at 10 m/s. What is the velocity of each object when it hits the ground?

Now that each object has some horizontal velocity, do the effects of mass change? Do the trajectories change? What do you think would happen if we started high enough and went fast enough that we never touched the ground?

---

While many parts of orbital mechanics can be described without considering mass, not all parts can be. For example, while it may be useful to describe an object's energy in terms of its specific energy (thus removing mass from the picture), this fails to reflect how much true energy it takes to move an object. Indeed, although trajectories do not change for objects of different masses, the energy it takes to move objects to that point does. Completing this worksheet, therefore, should have two conclusions: 1) objects in space of different mass will move similarly if other parameters are similar, but 2) it takes more energy to get heavier objects there in the first place.

### Module 1b: considering energy

Module 1a began by expanding on prior knowledge that students should have gained through high school physics courses or early undergraduate physics courses, by taking ballistic trajectories and asking the question of what happens if something starts from the ground and enters orbit. Now, module 1b will ask the opposite: what happens if something enters orbit from infinitely far away? The suggested plan for this submodule is to visually explore these ideas in KSP, leading to a derivation of the vis-viva equation.

In KSP, create an object of interest, then place it in a very high circular orbit around any body that is not the sun, and ideally without any moons (or, ensure that your object's trajectory never enters a moon's sphere of influence). Then, reduce the object's prograde velocity until it is zero. The object now represents an object that is brought within the sphere of influence of the central body from infinitely far away; note that the object will have a nonzero velocity as the central body slowly exerts its gravity on it. Create a save point here so that you can return to this moment.

Using time warp controls, demonstrate how the object's velocity increases as the object approaches the central body; this should be intuitive to students. 

Return to your save point, with the object being brought into the central body's sphere of influence from infinitely far away. Add small adjustments to the prograde velocity at various altitudes, to demonstrate the effects on the object's trajectory. Explore elliptical orbits and circular orbits first; with a sufficiently low altitude, clever manipulation of trajectory, and the orbital camera, it is also possible to observe how parabolic arcs as seen from the ground are really elliptical orbits whose trajectories terminate at sea level. Lastly, explore hyperbolic trajectories.

Time allowing, repeat the above with objects of different mass, observing how velocity is the same for two objects of different mass under the same conditions.

This is now a good time to derive **the vis-viva equation**.




